---
id: databases-eer-relational-mapping
title: EER Relational Mapping
course: databases
lecture: eer-relational-mapping
---

# EER Relational Mapping

## Entity Types

Let's now explore mapping the entities, properties, and relationships from the
extended entity-relationship model to relations. Suppose we have an entity type
named `ET`. We can create a corresponding relation named `ET`. If the entity
type has an identifying property type `A`, then the relation will have a primary
key `A`. If the entity type has a property type `B`, then the relation will have
an attribute `B`.

Suppose the entity type has a composite property type `C`, composed of `D` and
`E`. In the relation, we add attributes `D` and `E`, but what happened to
property type `C`? In the translation, we lose this property type and,
therefore, the context it provides. For example, if `C` is `Name`, `D` is
`FirstName`, and `E` is `LastName`, we lose the notion of `Name` composing
`FirstName` and `LastName` when building the relation.

Ideally, we want `C` to survive the transformation. However, we defined
relations as a subset of tuples constructed from domains with atomic values, not
composite values. The relational model is inherently flat, and the languages we
will look at - relational algebra, relational calculus, and SQL - only work when
this constraint holds.

## Multi-Valued Property Types

Consider the entity type `ET` with identifying property type `A`. From a
previous example, we saw that we could create a corresponding relation named
`ET` with primary key `A`. Now let's suppose `ET` has a multi-valued property
type `F`.

The relational model doesn't support multi-valued attributes, so we cannot
directly add `F` as an attribute on `ET`. Instead, we create a new relation,
`ET-F`. `ET-F` contains attributes `A`, which is a **foreign key** on `A` in
`ET`, and `F`, which holds a single value of `F` for the `ET` identified by `A`.

The combination of `A` and `F` in `ET-F` forms a **composite key** for `ET-F`.
Remember, a given instance of `ET` will have a unique value for `A`, and we can
associate that value with multiple different values of `F` so long as the
combination is unique. Of course, the values of `A` in `ET-F` must be a subset
of those that exist in `ET`.

The point to remember here is that in the relational model, instead of creating
an attribute that takes multiple values, we create multiple tuples in a new
relation that all reference the original relation.

![Converting multi-valued property type F on ET into a second relation
ET-F.](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221010225301.png)

## 1-1 Relationships

Suppose we have entity type `ET1` with identifying property type `A`, entity
type `ET2` with identifying property type `B`, and a 1:1 relationship type `R`
that connects them.

We start by creating a relation `ET1` with primary key `A` and relation `ET2`
with primary key `B`. We need some mechanism to associate these relations, and
there are two approaches we can take. In `ET1`, we can insert the primary key of
`ET2`, `B`, as a foreign key in `ET1` to connect the two relations.
Alternatively, we can insert the primary key of `ET1`, `A` as a foreign key in
`ET2` to form the connection.

![Connecting relations via foreign keys.](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221010230348.png)

Both solutions are acceptable in this most basic example, but we require one
configuration over the other in many cases. For example, suppose that `ET2` must
mandatorily participate in `R`. Every instance of `ET2` in the database must
connect to `ET1`; put another way, we cannot have an instance of `ET2` that
doesn't reference `ET1`. In this case, `ET2` must hold the reference. We cannot
ensure that all instances of `ET2` are referenced in `ET1` otherwise. Of course,
`ET2` must additionally have a non-`NULL` constraint on the foreign key.

## 1-Many Relationships

Let's suppose now `ET1` and `ET2` are in a 1-N relationship, where one instance
of `ET1` relates to many instances of `ET2`. Consider the two representational
options we saw above: should the `ET1` relation reference `ET2` or should `ET2`
reference `ET1`?

![1-M Relation Mapped](https://piazza.com/redirect/s3?bucket=uploads&prefix=paste%2Fkdywpehs5ki1ro%2F24bb3d1fae381a265b19dc435b4b343ae83df5bc69648b6b0e6841b8fa1f9e70%2Fimage.png)

We have a unique value for `A` for each instance of `ET1`, and we must associate
multiple instances of `ET2` with that key. As we saw earlier, the relational
model does not allow multi-valued attributes, so these references cannot live in
`ET1`. We need the `ET2` relation to hold the foreign key. Note that this
solution only works because the `ET2` instance can only associate with at most
one `ET1` instance.

## Many-Many Relationships

If `ET1` and `ET2` are in an N-M relationship, `R`, we appear to have a problem.
We already saw that we could not reference `ET2` from `ET1` since that would
require a multi-valued attribute. But now we cannot reference `ET1` from `ET2`
for the same reason. To solve this problem, we need to generate a particular
relation for `R`, which stores references to the primary keys `A` of `ET1` and
`B` of `ET2`.

![Creating a new relation representing a many-to-many relationship
type](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221010235830.png)

For a tuple in `ET1`, there may be multiple tuples in `R` referencing its key,
`A`, each with a unique value of `B` identifying a tuple in `ET2`. Vice versa,
for a tuple in `ET2`, there may be multiple tuples in `R`, referencing its key,
`B`, each with a unique value of `A` identifying a tuple in `ET1`. The
combination of `A` and `B` constitutes the key in `R`, representing the
relationship between one `ET1` and `ET2` instance.

## Weak Entity Types and Identifying Relationships

Let's look at an identifying relationship type, `R`, between a weak entity type,
`ET2`, with weakly identifying property type `B` and an entity type, `ET1`, with
identifying property type `A`. We can create the corresponding relations: `ET1`,
with primary key `A`, and `ET2`, with attribute `B`. How do we discriminate
amongst the tuples in `ET2`?

Our solution is to insert a reference to `ET1` in `ET2`. Specifically, we add an
`A` attribute in `ET2` as a foreign key on the `A` attribute in `ET1`. `ET2` may
have duplicate values for both `A` and `B` separately, but each pair will be
unique. In other words, the combination of `A` and `B` constitutes the key in
`ET2`.

![Associating a weak and strong entity type](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221011001925.png)

## Inheritance: Mandatory Disjoint

Consider three entity types: `ET`, with identifying property type `A` and
property type `B`; `ET1` with property type `C`; and `ET2`, with property type
`D`. `ET1` and `ET2` are in a mandatory, disjoint, super/subtype relationship
with `ET`, inheriting both `A` and `B` from `ET`. In this relationship, there
can be no instances of `ET` that are neither instances of `ET1` nor `ET2` (the
mandatory constraint), and no instances of `ET` can be instances of both `ET1`
and `ET2` (the disjoint requirement).

Since the relationship is mandatory, we won't have any concrete instances of
`ET`, so we don't need to create a relation for it. All `ET` instances will sit
as tuples in either the `ET1` or `ET2` relations. `ET1` has primary key `A` and
attributes `B` and `C`, and `ET2` has primary key `A` and attributes `B` and
`D`.

![The relation corresponding to the mandatory, disjoint super/subtype
relationship.](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221011004826.png)

## Inheritance: Mandatory, Overlap Allowed

Now consider a mandatory super/subtype relationship between `ET` and `ET1` and
`ET2`, but with overlap allowed. In other words, instances of `ET` can be
instances of `ET1` or `ET2` or both.

We might represent this system with a single relation, `ET`, which has a primary
key `A`, attributes `B`, `C`, and `D`, and an attribute named `Type`. `Type`
holds information indicating whether this tuple is an instance of ET1, ET2, or
both.

This option fails for several reasons. Instances of `ET1` will always have a
`NULL` value for `D`, and instances of `ET2` will always have a null value for
`C`. Furthermore, we've now coupled the value of the `Type` attribute to the
presence or absence of values for the `C` and `D` attributes. We will encounter
consistency issues if we update only one and not the other. For example, if we
update `Type` to "Both" but forget to add a value for `D`, how can we tell if
the tuple is an instance of `ET1` and `ET2`, or just `ET1`?

Let's instead create three relations: `ET`, with primary key `A` and attribute
`B`; `ET1`, with foreign key `A` on `ET` and attribute `C`; and `ET2` with
foreign key `A` on `ET` and attribute `D`. When we create a new instance of
`ET`, we add a tuple to the `ET` relation and then to either `ET1`, `ET2`, or
both.

![Two relational strategies for a mandatory super/subtype relationship with
overlap allowed.](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221011010840.png)

As a minor downside, this solution introduces some redundancy of `A` values for
tuples both in `ET1` and `ET2`. Still, that redundancy is favorable to the
excessive `NULL` values and consistency issues we saw in the other strategy.

## Inheritance: Non-Mandatory, Overlap Allowed

Now consider a non-mandatory super/subtype relationship between `ET` and `ET1`
and `ET2` with overlap allowed. In other words, instances of `ET` can be
instances of `ET1`, `ET2`, both, or neither. Again, we can take the `Type`
attribute approach we saw prior, with the added case where both `C` and `D` are
`NULL`, but we steer clear of it for the same reasons already discussed.

The solution here is almost identical to that from the previous section. Let's
create three relations: `ET`, with primary key `A` and attribute `B`; `ET1`,
with foreign key `A` on `ET` and attribute `C`; and `ET2` with foreign key `A`
on `ET` and attribute `D`. When creating a new instance of `ET`, we add a tuple
to `ET` and then either `ET1`, `ET2`, both, or neither.

## Inheritance: Non-Mandatory, Disjoint

Finally, let's consider the non-mandatory, disjoint relationship type. Again we
generate the relations `ET`, `ET1`, and `ET2`, as we saw previously. Since the
relationship is not mandatory, we can have tuples in `ET` not referenced by
`ET1` or `ET2`. When references are present, however, the referencing tuple will
exist exclusively in `ET1` or `ET2`. As a result, we don't see any of the
foreign key redundancy we saw in the overlapping cases.

## Union Types

Consider an entity type, `ET1`, with identifying property type `C`, an entity
type, `ET2`, with identifying property type `D`, and an entity type, `ET`, that
is the union of `ET1` and `ET2`, with a property type, `B`. We know that we will
have a relation, `ET1`, with a primary key, `C`, a relation, `ET2`, with a
primary key, `D`, and a relation, `ET`, with attribute `B`.

We can insert an artificial identifier in the relation `ET`, `ET-ID`, which
consists of either a value of `C` or `D`. Remember, every tuple in `ET` must be
either an instance `ET1` or `ET2`, so we can uniquely identify each tuple by the
primary key of one of the union types.

![Representing union types in the relational model using artificial
identifiers.](https://assets.omscs.io/notes/20221011013919.png)
